528 INST ΙΤ UT IONUM LIBRI QUATTUOR. [Lib. lv.

V1.

DE ACTIONIBUS.

Superest, ut de actionibus loquamur. actio autem nihil
aliud est, quam ius persequendi iudicio quod sibi debetur.

uit. Π. Actio is a term which has avariety ol meanings, more or less
cognate to one another. From signifying a mere act (as in Dig. 48. 1. 7)
it becomes limited to a processual act, an act done as part oi a judicial
proceeding, whether by one ot' the parties (Gaius iv. 11 sq, Dig. 1. a. 2.
6) or by the magistrate (Dig. 1. 7. 4). ln Dig. 47. 20. r it indicates a
public prosecution, and in Cod. ιο. 1. 6 it is used altogether improperly in
the sense ol an evidentiary document.

But by lar its commonest senses are two in number: (ι) as here in the
text, it means ‘a right os action’ The expression ‘ius persequendi quod
sibi debetur' at first might be taken to imply that actio is here used as
equivalent to actio in personam, sor it is difficult to represent a person
who denies one’s right to property as ‘owing’ one a debt; aud it is
plain from the next paragraph that Justinian is using actio in its widest
sense: ci. Dig. 50. 16. 178. 3 ‘hoc verbum “debuit” omnem omnino
actionem comprehendere intellegitur? (2) 'ibe actual exercise oi such
right oi action (as in the expressions actionem dare, denegare, actione
experiri), or, more generally, a ‘legal remedy! This sense in some
passages is narrower than in others, its extension in iact is threeiold:
(a) in its narrowest signification it denotes an actio inpersonam as
distinct from an actio in rem (p. 332 supr.), and here there is a close corre·
lation between actio and obligatio; sor every personal action asserts a
right in personam, and presupposes an obligatio. 'A real action, on the
other hand, though brought against a definite person, does not (as is re-
marked in ξ r) presuppose any ‘vinculum iuris’ between plaintiff and
defendant3 the latter is sued, not because he ‘oues’ anything, properly
speaking, but because he will not recognise a right which the plaintiff
has and can assert against the world. After such action has been
definitely commenced, the parties are bound to one another (Gaius iii.
180); but the action does not originate in an obligatio as personal
actions do. (b) Somewhat more widely, actio denotes a judicial pro·
ceeding which (in the formulary period) commenced with a formula, in
contradistinction to interdicts and the extraordinaria cognitio: and (c)
finally, in some passages it bears the sense oi any legal remedy whatso-
ever: ‘actionis verbo continetur in rem, in personam, directa, utilis,
praeiudicium, sicut ait Pomponius stipulationes etiam, quae praetoriae
sunt, quia actionum instar obtinent, ut damni infecti, legatorum, et si ·
quae similes sunt. Interdicta quoque actionis verbo continentur' Dig.
44. 7. 37, ‘integri restitutio est redintegrandae rei vel causae actio’
Paul. sent. rec. 1. 7. 1, ‘agere etiam is videtur, qui exceptione utitur,
nam reus in excipiendo actor est’ Dig. 44. 1. 1: but cf. Dig. 50. 16. 8. 1
‘actionis verbo non continetur exceptio.¹

 

